---
title: "Tides"
author: "Keelan Krinsky"
output: pdf_document

---

# Imports
# Tides
Tides are long period ocean waves moving in response to gravitational forces exerted by moon and sun. Tides originate off shore in open ocean and move outwards towards the shore. At the shore tides are experienced as a rise and fall in the water level

>NOTE: This is quite small in SA normally around 2 meters. 

## Origin
AS tide is generated by gravitational pull the force acting to initiate the tide proportional to the mass of the two objects involved namely the moon/sun and the earth, and inversely proportional to the cube of the distance between them.

The cubed term in this relationship results because the earth and the moon/sun are in constant motion relative to each other, so instead of a simply considering the gravitational force between these two bodies, the differential of the gravitational force must be taken.

$F=-\frac{GMm}{r^2}$ \newline
$\rightarrow dF=\left(\frac{dF}{dr}\right)dr= \frac{2GMm}{r^3}dr$


Both the moon and the sun exert a significant tidal force upon the earth. The moon due to its close proximity, and the sun due to its enormous mass. The moon has the dominant effect with the sun constituting 46\% of the total force experienced by the earth. 


## Tide Bulge
A tidal bulge, that is a build up of water, develops due to inertia as the planet spins. The earths tidal bulges track the position of the moon and to a lesser extent the sun as the angles of theses two celestial bodies in relation to the earth changes. (this can be related to the importance of the equinoxes and solstices in arcane weather prediction systems). It follows that the position of the bulge is affected by the season, with a high declination angle in winter, and a low declination angle in summer. 

COPY DIAGRAM. 


## Tidal range
The tidal range is the difference in height between high and low tide. 

## Flood tide
The flood tide is the rising tide, i.e. the tide coming in.

### Ebb tide
The ebb tide is the receding tide, i.e. going out. 

## Affect in Estuaries
In an estuary the bottleneck through which water is exchanged with the marine environment implies that a relatively strong current is created by the rising and falling if the tide. 	


## Variation with Time
A lunar day is about 24 hours and 50 minutes. So the time at which a given point in the tide, such as high tide or low tide, is observed will change by $\approx$ 50 min each day. Earth rotates through two tidal bulges every day i.e 2 high and two low tides,(wtf why?); however, the presence of continents can disturb this pattern. When sun the earth and the moon are all in alignment, such as in full moon or new moon the tidal pull of the sun and moon are cumulative and stronger tides are experiences (spring/super tides). Conversely when the moon and the sun are at right angles to each other (relative to the earth), moderate, neep tides are experienced. 

Furthermore the orbit of the moon around the earth is elliptical, passing through the closest point in the orbit, the perihelion, once a month when the moon is closest to the earth. The same applies to the aphelion, (furthest point). If perigee occurs concurrently with spring tide, or apogee with neep tide the combined effect with be even more dramatic.


## Cycles
Three are three common patterns of tides observed. Which pattern in present at a given area of shore depends predominately on its global position but can be affected by the shape of the shoreline itself. 

### Diurnal
In a diurnal tide cycle there is one high and one low tide per day. Such a pattern is observed form example, in the gulf of Mexico. 


### Semi-diurnal
In a semi-diurnal tide cycle there are two high and two low tides (of roughly equal magnitude), each day. Such a pattern is observed, for example, in South Africa. 

### Mixed
In a mixed tidal cycle there are two high and two low tides per day, but one is much greater in magnitude than the other. (COPY IMAGES). 

## Effect of Shoreline Shape
A funnel shaped shoreline might magnify the effect of the tide. Such as the 15m tidal range seen in the bay of fundi. 
COPY IMAGE

In mid oceanic islands, bays with very narrow inlets and river dominated estuaries there are negligible Tidal ranges. This is due to limited flow rate in the case of inlets, strong river force in the case of estuaries, and other river associated systems and very little resistance to the bulge in the case of mid ocean islands. 

## Affect of wind
Strong winds offshore can lead to spring high tide, making the tide height higher than average. 


# Appendix

