---
title:"Environmental impact of wast water"


---
# Imports

Import WaterPH as WaterPH

## Flow monitoring
Data usedto indetofy pollutionincidents,predictloadontotreatment worksorrevicenig water.

## Physical characteristics. 
pH conductivity turbidity temperatureetcCOPY SLIDE. 

##__Water: Water Conductivity__

##  __WaterConductivity: Water Conductivity__
>NOTE: Fitting nets onto storm water drains. 

## Class examples

### Winery 
Main economic activity 
most industries abstract industries form the burg river into there porcesses, and the muncipality discharges. 

Winery contains 3 boreholes + dam. pourtale is mostly from bore holes. 

Receives water from perennial streams, aquifers feeding streams are not quantified. 

Non-compliance of municipality. 

in dry season discharged onto land, in wet season into river. 

## Questions 
 #. Two regulatory laws applicable:
 	#.General standards,+ NEMA+any bylaws present+ National water act. 

 #. three risks of water factors of winery 
 	#. biological contamination of microorganisms used in fermentation process, (_Sachromyces Cerivisie_)
	#. potential pH disruption due to acidic stabilisers used within the production process
	#. Run off of pesticides into water system relating to water toxicity especially for aquatic insects and potential even fish.
	#. run of of fertiliser into dam/river leading to eutrophication.
 
 #. Five parameters to monitor. 
 	#. Water pH 
	#. COD
	#. TDS (for run offs)
	#. particular chemical tests for pesticides. 
	#. nitrate adn phosphate concentrations would be monitored directly. 

 #. High levels of COD. present to prove not responsible. 
Tests of water quality at any outlet into the river over a sustained period, with frequent measurements to show complaint levels of COD. Accreditatio, Acreditedlaboritory followISo system and are orditored.documents generated by such labs can be used in the court as it is a legal document.

